@document.meta
title: Ensembles
description: 
authors: kathy
categories: 
created: 2023-12-02T02:17:06-0700
updated: 2023-12-02T02:58:48-0700
version: 1.1.1
@end

{:$/index:* TOC}
* Conformational Ensembles Determine Protein Structure
  {larsenSimultaneousDeterminationProtein2005}{bonomiPrinciplesProteinStructural2017}{thomasenConformationalEnsemblesIntrinsically2022}  In order to describe the structure of proteins with a high degree of heterogenuity, one must use conformational ensembles. 
  Comformational ensembles encode the populations of a proteins relevant conformations.

  {bonomiPrinciplesProteinStructural2017} {larsenSimultaneousDeterminationProtein2005} {schneidman-duhovnyUncertaintyIntegrativeStructural2014} When determining conformational ensembles, neither experiment or computational model can be used in isolation. 
  
  {schneidman-duhovnyUncertaintyIntegrativeStructural2014} Data collected from experiment is sparse, meaning the number of unique observations is less that the degrees of freedom.

  {bonomiPrinciplesProteinStructural2017} Computational methods such as Monte Carlo or molecular dynamics also fall short to determine protein structure:
  ~ The force fields used in in even the most advanced methods are still approximations. This can lead to large errors in predicted properties of proteins.
  ~ Limited computational resources put an upper bound on the protein simulation time.
    This means that these methods may "run out of time" before a conformational space is fully explored.

  {bonomiPrinciplesProteinStructural2017} {thomasenConformationalEnsemblesIntrinsically2022} {larsenSimultaneousDeterminationProtein2005} Combining data from experiment with computational methods is a promising method of protein structure determination. 

  {thomasenConformationalEnsemblesIntrinsically2022}  There are usually 4 components in combining biophysical experiments and computational modeling.
  ~ one or more experiments whose data gives information on protein strucure
  ~ a method to sample protein conformations computationally
  ~ a forward model, which calculates experimental observables from the conformational ensemble
  ~ a refinement method, which refines the ensemble based on experimental data
 
{wardIntegrativeStructuralBiology2013} The past decade has seen the development of many hybrid methods that combine theory and experiment. 

  {thomasenConformationalEnsemblesIntrinsically2022} The most recent developments however have been in dealing with effects due to averaging over ensembles, as well as dealing with errors in experimental data, noise, and ambiguous data. 

** Bayesian Inference methods


  {bonomiPrinciplesProteinStructural2017} There is no consensus on how to compare structural ensembles that were generated using different techniques.

  {gaalswykEmergingRolePhysical} It is important to note that the term "ensemble" is often not carefully used within the field of structural biology.
   {gaalswykEmergingRolePhysical} In statistical mechanics, a protein's ensemble, given some set of conditions, is a probabability distribution over all possible conformations of that protein.
   {gaalswykEmergingRolePhysical} In structural biology, the term is overloaded to mean many different things.
   {gaalswykEmergingRolePhysical} There is for example, a thermodynamic ensemble, which refers to the distribution of a protein's conformations under thermal equilibrium.
   {gaalswykEmergingRolePhysical} Next, there is an uncertainty ensemble, which is a collection of conformations that are degenerate due to sparse, ambiguous, or noisy data.
   {gaalswykEmergingRolePhysical} Uncertainty ensembles may be further broken down as procedurally generated, or as coming from a well defined distribution.
   This section will review the different types of "ensembles" used in structural biology. 

** Conformational Sampling


   {ozenneFlexiblemeccanoToolGeneration2012} An example of this is flexible-meccano, which uses amino-acid specific hard spheres to avoid steric clashes when generating polypetide conformations. 
   {ozenneFlexiblemeccanoToolGeneration2012} These choices are
   --- (in zotero) Thomasen and Lindorff-Larsen, “Conformational Ensembles of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins and Flexible Multidomain Proteins.”
* Papers
  
  ** larsenSimultaneousDeterminationProtein2005
  ** thomasenConformationalEnsemblesIntrinsically2022
  ** bonomiPrinciplesProteinStructural2017
  ** schneidman-duhovnyUncertaintyIntegrativeStructural2014
** wardIntegrativeStructuralBiology2013
